+++
title = "My Life in Norway"
date = 2025-02-02
type = "post"
tags = ["norway", "poland", "culture"]
image = "/my_life_in_norway/media_card.webp"
draft = true
+++

I was born and raised in Norway. My father was a naval officer from Gdynia,
Poland, who sought asylum in the country in 1986, and my mother immigrated from
Zambrów in 1996.

I want to talk a bit about some important decisions I undertook recently in my
life. The goal is to share some insights which are relevant to Norwegians, or
anyone else who finds multicultural exchanges interesting. As most of us know,
we live in a world of global exchange of not just goods, but also ideas and
culture. With this short essay, I hope to offer some insights, ideas, and
constructive criticism that everyone can expand their worldview with. While I
don't believe in the idea that simply importing people of fundamentally
incompatible cultures with the host country constitutes a valid social policy,
I do believe that every culture offers at least one thing that can widen our
perception of the world for the better. It is important to highlight that this
is a two-way street: my life in Norway has had a formative, profoundly positive
impact on how I view the world, which I will get into later.

If we don't open up our minds -- at least give a cursory glance -- to how other
people do things we take for granted, we might end up like the Americans.
Notice how Americans enjoy films, but only if they are made in Hollywood. If
they have a film set in a foreign place and culture, it is always through the
lens of an American protagonist or main character. Even one of their most
popular films set in Shogunate Japan is about Tom Cruise as a samurai. Many
cannot locate UK, their former colonial overlords, on a globe (Trivedi, 2002).
Their idea of Irish culture is St. Patrick's Day, even though the Irish don't
really even celebrate it in Ireland. You get the idea.

Now, is that such an issue? Other than that New York Stock Exchange incorrectly
hoisted the flag of Switzerland when announcing Spotify's listing on the
exchange (Sisario, 2018), by people who probably spent more on their education
than you spent on your house, there are actually quite a few issues that can
develop in an insular society, which are unhealthy. For instance, many
Americans believe that introducing any form of government intervention in the
social sphere would, for example, undermine democracy (Pew Research Center,
2019). Both those who view "socialism" negatively or positively in the USA
understand the term only through the very brief history lessons about the
Soviet Union, and some headlines about the Venezuelan economic collapse. It is
easy to understand how simply exposing oneself to foreign cultures, even
through films, would quickly dispel such ill-conceived and childish
understanding of basic concepts. A few films about Europe – not through Tom
Cruise, but actual Europeans – would quickly make Americans understand that,
no, we are not socialist countries. The last socialist republic collapsed in
1989. It is no wonder why there is so much misery and confusion in USA, when
those people simply don't know any better. Any new idea for governing their
society is labelled as tantamount to political revolution, even though
elsewhere in the world it's just... normal, often for hundreds of years.

Culturally, socially, and politically, Norway is not in such a dire state, but
that doesn't mean there isn't room for improvement, or even that Norwegians
don't live in some kind of bubble. Ultimately, we all live in a bubble. It's
only a matter of extent, and by no means do I consider myself a learned
traveller who thinks of each continent as his home. I speak only three
languages, and I never travelled outside of Europe.

There are many reasons why I have decided to move to Poland. Not all of them
are related to the cultural, social, or political situation in Norway, but they
are a big factor. They are too numerous to list here, so I will focus on the
most relevant ones.

Why did I move to Poland? Let's start with a simple, economic reason that
everyone can understand: the real estate situation in Norway. Everyone should
be aware by now that the estate situation in Norway is absurd beyond belief. As
a result of the 2008 mortgage crisis, Norway has implemented extreme austerity
measures that should have been lifted many, many years ago, but are still
sustained. The biggest of these austerity measures is the limitation of the
size of a mortgage, which cannot exceed an amount equal to your annual income,
multiplied by five. This was a reasonable measure in the wake of the 2008
mortgage crisis, but, after being sustained for 15 years, has resulted in
a crippled real estate market. Because of this extremely tight mortgaging
limit, companies were forced over the past 15 years to build housing that
people could afford with that limit. Five times your annual income is not a
lot. Combined with a fragile fiat currency that is brought to its knees by a
regional conflict, a US presidential election, and an overall claustrophobic
economic situation discouraging foreign investment in the country, and you
have a real estate nightmare on your hands. Even if the government lifts this
limit on mortgages, it will still take at least a decade for the market to
recover. Every house will be bought, and prices will shoot up for the
foreseeable future, until companies can correct. It is not going to be a quick
process.

Considering that I am 28 years old, I am not waiting until I am nearing
retirement age before I have a chance of applying for a mortgage for a regular
house in Norway. No, my wife is not going to be forced to work for a mortgage.
If medieval peasants six centuries ago could afford a place to live in -- who
could work as little as 120 days in the year (Rauch, n.d.) -- then I should be
able to afford a decent house with a regular full-time job in the 21st century.
Nobody is going to convince me that this is to be expected, or normal.
Mortgaging in the first place is an aberration; a deep perversion of modern
economics and attitude towards money. The Roman Catholic Church expressly
forbade usury, as it is a sin. This is not exclusive to Norway, of course, as
it is the basis of the entire industrialised world. The world economy is built
on top of debt futures. Nevertheless, in Norway this situation is exceptionally
bad in the current generation. The fact that dual income is an essential
prerequisite should cause more outrage than it does.

Poland was the only country in Europe that had economic growth during, and in
the aftermath of, the 2008 mortgage crisis. The real estate situation in Poland
is not ideal either, due to Bidenflation and many other economic developments,
but it remains sane. There are no extreme austerity measures limiting your
mortgaging possibilities. You can afford a mortgage with one income, let alone
with dual income. Norway is unique in Europe, in its austerity measures on the
real estate market.

For this reason alone, I struggled to see a future in Norway, as this situation
has wider personal ramifications. Attracting a suitable spouse becomes
immediately more difficult if you do not have a house. At least, this is the
case in a country like Norway, where two-generation households are the norm. In
many other countries around the world, such as Poland and Spain, nearly half of
households are three-generation. Having your parents, with your kids, still in
the household has many personal and societal benefits. Daycares in Norway are
necessary, only because both parents are forced by the perverted economy to
work. Maybe there's some feminism involved in that as well, but it doesn't
really matter what the reason is. It's wicked no matter how you approach the
issue.

## References

Sisario, B. (2018) *Spotify is greeted by wall street with a Swiss flag, even
though it’s from Sweden, The New York Times*. Available at:
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/03/business/media/spotify-swiss-banner.html
(Accessed: 02 February 2025). 

Trivedi, B.P. (2002) *Survey reveals geographic illiteracy, National Geographic*.
Available at:
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/article/geography-survey-illiteracy
(Accessed: 02 February 2025). 

Pew Research Center (2019) *In their own words: Behind Americans' views of
'socialism' and 'capitalism,' Pew Research Center*. Available at:
https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2019/10/07/in-their-own-words-behind-americans-views-of-socialism-and-capitalism/
(Accessed: 02 February 2025). 

Rauch, E. (no date) *Pre-industrial workers had a shorter workweek than
today’s*. Available at:
https://groups.csail.mit.edu/mac/users/rauch/worktime/wre.html (Accessed: 02
February 2025). 
