---
title: "Norway vs. EU: Shooting Itself in the Foot?"
description: "Does Norway staying out of the EU ultimately fail to achieve Norway's self-stated goal of 'independence' and 'liberty?' I think so. Here's why."
tags: ["economics", "politics", "norway", "european union"]
cover:
  image: /norway_vs_eu/card.jpg
date: 2025-07-28
---

As far back as 1972, Norway had a referendum on whether or not to join the
European Union (EU). For reference, this was so far back that the EU didn't
even exist yet. It was only the Economic European Community (EEC) back then.
Narrowly, the population voted about 53% nay. There was another referendum, a
lot more recently, in 1994. That time, it was even more narrow, with 52% voting
nay. Sweden, which had referendum at around the same time, voted 53% yay
instead, and became a member of the EU. This raises a perfectly obvious
question: **was the Norwegian public wise in these two landmark decisions?**
Clearly it is not a cut-and-dry issue, as all that decided the outcome was only
about 100,000 people. If 100,000 more people were convinced that EU would be to
Norway's benefit -- rather than to its detriment -- Norway would have been an
EU member in either 1972 or 1994. Let's examine this more closely.

First of all, let's identify what motivated the decisions in either referendum
of the general public of Norway. According to Statistics Norway (*Statistisk
Sentralbyrå*), [the key fear of those voting nay in either referendum was
loss of
autonomy](https://www.cvce.eu/content/publication/2001/5/23/ce0ab381-e7c3-45dd-9a93-3e34ef66476f/publishable_en.pdf).
Even back in 1972, when the EU was not a fully political union yet, 81% of
those voting against EU membership cited this as a key factor in their
decision. Even bigger portion still simply did not see any benefits, at 84%.
Interestingly, even of those who voted positively for EU membership, 64% feared
that EU membership would invite entry of foreign workers and foreign interests
into Norway. In other words, even those who were receptive to EU membership
were aware that some kind of compromises were pending, but saw that the
advantages outweighed the perceived negatives.

Another factor for the outcome of both referendums was the rural-urban divide, with [the
rural Norway overwhelmingly voting against EU
membership](https://www.jstor.org/stable/4201020). In summary, key fear of the
rural people was that piling Brussels on top of Oslo as an authority would
overwhelm the 'rural class' of people, overriding their every decision or wish.
As someone from Mandal who prefers rural life, I can resonate with this fear,
even if I still think it was misplaced. In my experience, Brussels or not, the
government is going to have its way with you.

{{< figure src="/norway_vs_eu/1994_referendums.png" caption="Results of 1994 European Union referendums in Norway and Sweden. Statistics based on Statistics Norway." >}}

These voter motivations more or less align with what I know from Norwegians,
[as someone who lived there my whole life](/posts/why_i_left). Throughout many
conversations about Norway's status in the world, I have repeatedly heard the
following two words come up: **independence** (*uavhengighet*) and **liberty**
(*frihet*). For example, why should Norway categorically ban imports of all
potatoes forever? Because Norwegian farmers need to be free from foreign
intervention and tyranny of cheap competition. In one particular case, I even
heard the argument that Norwegians are uniquely the best people in the world
when it comes to not wasting any food from grocery[^1], such as Coop or REMA
1000. According to that person, inviting competitors from abroad, such as LIDL
or Aldi, would undermine this culture of saving food from waste. As a
consequence, cultural independence and liberty of Norway would be infringed.
Basically, the idea of 'independence and liberty' permeates the entire public
conscience when it comes to foreign policy.

[^1]: As an aside, [this is completely
    untrue.](https://www.nationen.no/matsvinn-det-er-bra-med-en-lov-som-sier-at-matkjedene-ma-gi-bort-spiselig-mat-de-ikke-far-solgt/o/5-148-622080)
450,000 tonnes of food is wasted every year across Norway.

But that was the situation as seen by the general public of Norway. Let's move
onto the essential questions regarding the reality of Norway's current situation
as a non-EU member. What does Norway actually get out of not being in the EU?

It does not take much review to conclude that Norway is forced to play smart
politics if it is to exist in Europe outside of the EU. The cornerstone of this
strategy is the European Economic Area (EEA) agreement (*EØS-avtalen*), a deal
that grants Norway access to the EU's single market. This is, on the surface,
the best of both worlds. Norway gets to trade freely with its largest partners,
while remaining, officially, the master of its own house. But this arrangement
has given rise to a uniquely Norwegian political problem, often described with
the pejorative term [fax
democracy](https://civitas.org.uk/2013/08/12/fax-democracy-norway-has-more-clout-than-you-know/)[^2].
The term illustrates the reality of the situation: Norway receives laws from
Brussels, as if by fax, and is obligated to implement them into its own legal
code, all without (usually) having a single minister, representative, or even a
junior aide at the table where those laws were drafted and voted upon.

[^2]: This article actually argues against the point I am making, but I thought
I would include it to offer fair and nuanced representation of EU critics as it
relates to Norway.

This is not a trivial matter of conforming to a few trade standards. By some
estimates, Norway has adopted roughly three-quarters of all EU legislation
through the EEA agreement. This has led to the profound irony that in its quest
for 'independence,' Norway has arguably surrendered more legislative power than
it would have as a full member. As a member, it would have voting rights, the
power of veto on key issues, and a seat in the European Parliament to shape the
very laws it now passively accepts. On top of this, Norway pays hundreds of
millions of euros to the EU each year for this market access; a fee without
without representation. While the nay side can correctly claim victory in
protecting key sectors like agriculture and fisheries from direct EU control,
one must ask if the trade-off was worth it. Has Norway truly protected its
independence and liberty, or has it simply exchanged a seat at the table for a
stool in the hallway?

![Stanczyk by Jan Matejko](/norway_vs_eu/stanczyk.jpg)

Of course, critics of this view have valid rebuttals. They will argue that the
quarter of EU legislation Norway *doesn't* adopt makes all the difference,
particularly for cherished industries like fisheries and farming. They might
also claim that Norway retains crucial 'wiggle room' in how it implements the
laws it does accept. And they are not wrong. These exceptions and
implementation details are significant. Yet, to focus on them is to miss the
forest for the trees. The true cost of Norway’s arrangement isn't found in the
fine print of EEA directives, but in its silent shackles on the world stage.

What are those shackles? To understand, consider Hungary under Viktor Orbán.
Now, one can vehemently disagree with Orbán's politics -- as many in Norway and
across Europe do -- but it is impossible to deny his effectiveness at using EU
membership as a tool for his own national agenda. From a position of full
membership, Orbán has repeatedly shaped, delayed, or outright blocked EU-wide
decisions until his demands were met. He has used Hungary's veto power as a
powerful lever to extract concessions and advance his vision. Hungary does not
even need powerful resources like oil and gas, as Orbán has a voice in the EU
Council, and he uses it. For example:

- In January 2025, [Orbán linked his support for extending EU sanctions on
Russia to Ukraine reopening the transit pipeline for Russian
gas.](https://www.dw.com/en/hungarys-orban-threatens-to-block-eu-sanctions-on-russia/a-71404115)
- Despite Hungary holding the rotating EU Council presidency, [Orbán traveled
to Moscow in July 2024 to meet Vladimir Putin, without any EU
mandate](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/world/hungarys-orban-visits-putin-in-moscow-drawing-backlash-from-some-european-leaders).
EU leaders rebuked him for supposed appeasement and stressed he did not
represent the bloc’s foreign policy position
- At a summer event in July 2025, [Orbán warned he would torpedo the EU’s next
seven-year budget unless Brussels unlocked billions in cohesion funds suspended
over rule-of-law
concerns](https://www.euractiv.com/section/politics/news/hungarys-orban-says-he-will-not-back-eu-budget-unless-funds-released/).
His ultimatum highlighted his willingness to use Hungary’s unanimity vote as
leverage.

{{< figure src="/norway_vs_eu/orban_putin.webp" caption="Viktor Orbán (left) meeting Vladimir Putin (right). From [BBC News](https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cml29r8d2zxo)" >}}
![]()

Norway, in contrast, has no such lever. When the EU formulates a common foreign
policy on everything from climate change to relations with Russia or China,
Norway can only watch from the sidelines. It cannot play the spoiler, build a
blocking coalition, or anything of the sort. As an economically ponderous
petro-state, Norway definitely cannot leverage oil and gas. Wielding its oil
and gas reserves as a political weapon, in the style of an embargo, is simply
not in the nation's political DNA. The Norwegian television thriller *Occupied*
(*Okkupert*) vividly imagines the disastrous outcome if Norway were to pursue
such a bellicose foreign policy. A nation of five million people, however
wealthy, would be swiftly brought to its knees by giants like the EU, the US,
or China.

Put another way, one could think back to the times Julius Caesar. Before he
became emperor, he invaded Gaul and burnt its civilisation down to the ground.
Despite being a fairly advanced civilisation, with fearsome warriors, the Gauls
stood little chance against the much-better organised and powerful Roman
Legions. Very little could have been done to prevent Gaul's demise, but one
thing that absolutely would have stopped all of Caesar's ambitions would be
simple: joining the Roman Republic.

![Vercingetorix Throws Down His Arms at the Feet of Julius Caesar by Lionel Royer](/norway_vs_eu/caesar.jpg)

Luckily, the EU is nowhere near as fearsome as Julius Caesar and his Legions,
but the same principle applies in Norway's situation. The point also isn't to
advocate for Norway to lead an aggressive foreign policy, where they threaten
everyone with everything, including an oil embargo and the kitchen sink, if
they don't get their way. Current Norwegian foreign policy is more or less
smart, even without EU in the picture. What is important to know, however, is
that the current foreign policy isn't implemented just because the Norwegian
people want it: they have to implement it, lest they face seriously unpleasant
consequences. **Is this not by definition lack of independence and liberty?**

For fifty years, this trade-off may have seemed acceptable. Norway's immense
oil wealth and the stability of the post-Cold War era created a comfortable
buffer, making true political engagement feel optional. But the world is
changing. With the USA's [suicidal foreign
policy](https://edition.cnn.com/2025/01/08/politics/trump-greenland-canada-panama-analysis)
alienating European allies and the geopolitical ground shifting under
everyone's feet, the idea of standing alone is starting to look less like a
proud choice and more like a dangerous vulnerability. [Recent polls and
analyses suggest that Norwegians are beginning to
notice.](https://ukandeu.ac.uk/is-norway-edging-towards-a-fresh-eu-membership-bid/)

The core of the Norwegian dilemma has never been about paying fees to Brussels
or the regulation of potatoes. It has always been about what self-determination
is. The referendums of 1972 and 1994 answered the question for their time,
choosing an ideal of liberty defined by separation; between rural and urban,
and Oslo and Brussels. The question now is whether that definition still holds.
In the turbulent decade to come, real independence may not be found in
isolationism, but in the strength, influence, and security that comes from
having a seat at the table. Only time will tell if a new generation of
Norwegians will be forced to ask themselves the same question their parents and
grandparents did, and whether they will arrive at a different answer.
