---
title: "My Life in Norway, and Why I Moved On"
description: "I want to talk a bit about some important decisions I undertook recently in my life."
tags: ["economics", "culture", "politics", "norway", "poland"]
cover:
  image: /why_i_moved_on/card.jpg
date: 2025-07-24
---

My name is Maxwell Jensen. I was born and raised in Norway, but my story begins
in Poland. My father was a naval officer from Gdańsk who sought asylum in
Norway in 1986, and my mother immigrated from Zambrów in 1996.

The goal here is to share some insights that might be relevant to Norwegians,
or really, anyone who finds multicultural exchanges interesting. We all know we
live in a world of global exchange -- not just of goods, but of ideas and
culture. With this short essay, I hope to offer some insights and constructive
criticism that everyone can use to expand their worldview. While I don't
believe that simply importing people of fundamentally incompatible cultures
constitutes a valid social policy, I do believe every culture offers *at least
one thing* that can widen our perception of the world for the better. And let
me be clear, this is a two-way street: my life in Norway has had a formative,
profoundly positive impact on how I view the world, which I will get into
later.

If we don't open up our minds -- or at least give a cursory glance -- to how
other people do things, we might end up like the Americans. Notice how
Americans enjoy films, but generally only if they are made in Hollywood. If a
film is set in a foreign place, it's almost always through the lens of an
American protagonist. Even one of their most popular films set in Shogunate
Japan is about Tom Cruise as a samurai. This insularity can have amusing
consequences, like when [the New York Stock Exchange incorrectly hoisted the
Swiss flag to announce Spotify's
listing](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/03/business/media/spotify-swiss-banner.html)
-- an error made by people who likely spent more on their education than you
spent on your house. You get the idea.

Now, is that such a big issue? Actually, yes. An insular society can develop
some unhealthy blind spots. For instance, [a 2019 Pew Research Center
study](https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2019/10/07/in-their-own-words-behind-americans-views-of-socialism-and-capitalism/)
showed that many Americans believe any form of government intervention in the
social sphere would undermine democracy. Both those who view "socialism"
negatively and those who view it positively in the USA seem to understand the
term only through brief history lessons about the Soviet Union and some
headlines about Venezuela. It’s easy to see how simply exposing oneself to
foreign cultures, even through films, would dispel such an ill-conceived and
almost childishly simple understanding of basic concepts. A few films about
Europe -- not through Tom Cruise, but actual Europeans -- would quickly make
them understand that, no, we are not "socialist" countries in that sense. It is
no wonder there is so much misery and confusion in the USA when people simply
don't know any better.

Culturally and socially, Norway is not in such a dire state, but that doesn't
mean there isn't room for improvement, or that Norwegians don't live in some
kind of bubble. Ultimately, we all do. It's only a matter of extent. By no
means do I consider myself some learnt world traveler; I speak only three
languages and have never travelled outside of Europe.

There are many reasons why I decided to move to Poland. Not all of them are
related to the cultural or political situation in Norway, but they are a big
factor. They are too numerous to list here, so I will focus on the most
relevant.

Why did I move to Poland? Let's start with a simple, economic reason that
everyone can understand: the real estate situation in Norway. For my
generation, it is, to put it bluntly, absurd beyond belief. As a result of the
2008 mortgage crisis, Norway implemented extreme austerity measures that should
have been lifted years ago. The biggest of these is the limitation of a
mortgage to five times your annual income. This was a reasonable measure in the
wake of the crisis, but after more than a decade, it has resulted in a crippled
real estate market.

{{< figure src="/why_i_moved_on/housing_bubble.png" caption="From [Bloomberg](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-03-05/norway-house-prices-rise-for-second-month-defying-central-bank)" >}}

Because of this extremely tight mortgaging limit, companies were forced to
build only the housing people could afford within that narrow margin. Five
times your annual income is not a lot. Combine that with a fragile fiat
currency brought to its knees by a regional conflict or a US presidential
election, overall claustrophobic economic regulation discouraging foreign
investment, and you have a real estate nightmare on your hands. Even if the
government lifts this limit, it will take at least a decade for the market to
recover as prices will shoot up for the foreseeable future.

Considering I am 29 years old, I am not waiting until I am nearing retirement
before I have a chance of applying for a mortgage on a regular house. And no,
my wife is not going to be forced to work for a mortgage. This led me to a
startling thought: if a medieval peasant six centuries ago could afford a place
to live -- [working as little as 120 days a
year](https://groups.csail.mit.edu/mac/users/rauch/worktime/hours_workweek.html)
-- then I should be able to afford a decent house with a regular job in the
21st century. Nobody is going to convince me this is normal. Mortgaging in the
first place is an aberration, a deep perversion of modern economics. The
Catholic Church[^1] expressly forbids usury, as it is a sin. This isn't exclusive
to Norway, of course, but here the situation is exceptionally bad for my
generation. The fact that dual income is an essential prerequisite should cause
far more outrage than it does.

[^1]: To be clear, I am not Roman Catholic.

Poland was the only country in Europe that had economic growth during the 2008
crisis. Its real estate situation is not ideal either, thanks to global
inflation and other developments, but it remains sane. There are no extreme
austerity measures limiting your mortgaging possibilities. You can afford a
mortgage with one income. For this reason alone, I struggled to see a future in
Norway.

This has wider personal ramifications. Attracting a suitable spouse becomes
immediately more difficult if you do not have a house, at least in a country
like Norway where two-generation households are the norm. In many other
countries, like Poland and Spain, multi-generation households are common.
Having your parents in the house with your kids has immense benefits. Daycares
in Norway are necessary only because both parents are forced by the perverted
economy to work, and there are no other adults in the house to take care of the
children. This isn't just about necessity; it's a different social model. Why
should a stranger take care of your children? Food for thought.

Of course, there is more to life than economics. I do not live by work, or how
much cool stuff I can buy on AliExpress, but I thought I would start with
something that -- at least I think -- should be the most readily digestible for
the common reader. Let's move onto more meaningful, important topics. However,
I will have to compress my statements significantly, otherwise I would be
writing a book, not an Internet article. Bear that in mind, in case the
following statements feel superficial or incomplete.

Perhaps the easiest way to see the difference between Polish and Norwegian
culture is observing the way 17th May Constitution Day in Norway is celebrated
compared to the 11th November Independence Day in Poland. Constitution Day in
Norway feels more like a birthday, whereas Independence Day in Poland is more
like a funeral. Somebody from Norway attending an Independence Day march in
Poland might be very surprised by this, until you remember that the Polish
state's sovereignty was built on blood and sacrifice. Hundreds of thousands of
young men had to sacrifice themselves so that today we can be free. The Polish
Constitution is written in blood of my great-grandfathers.

{{< youtube 7SpddNW7a3k >}}

Meanwhile, with the way Norwegians celebrate Constitution Day, you would think
the Norwegian Constitution was written by Coca-Cola. My intention is not to
degrade the significance of the Norwegian Constitution, of course, but the
celebrations are distinctly more upbeat than in Poland. This is very
interesting, because Norwegian independence from Sweden in 1905 could have
easily been very bloody. In fact, it is one of the things that sort of started
driving me nuts when I learned of it, back when I was doing my hunter's licence
in 2023: Norwegians in the 19th century were armed to the teeth. This was the
case in most of Europe, but especially Norway. The reason why Sweden didn't
invade is not because everyone in Scandinavia was oh-so-polite, but because the
quintessential hobby of nearly all Norwegian men was sharpshooting. If Sweden
were to invade Norway, it would be a protracted military nightmare where every
window and treeline could hide a crack shot. Sure, Swedes on the general did
not want war, but when has public opinion ever stopped pointless bloodshed? In
other words, the Norwegian Constitution could have also been easily written in
blood.

{{< figure src="/why_i_moved_on/skytterlag.jpg" caption="Photo of the Langseth shooting club from the 1950s. Taken from the digital museum of [Museene i Akershus](https://digitaltmuseum.no/011012587952/fra-et-skytterstevne-01-10-2013-langseth-skytterlag-med-trofeer-ca-1950)." >}}

At the same time, I have almost never heard about this from any Norwegians I
have been with. The old Norwegian gun culture is fascinating. One of the
retired gunsmiths I spoke with said how just 30-40 years ago it was quite
normal for young teenagers to carry hunting rifles in public. It did not cause
any alarm. Nobody called the police to summon a SWAT team to the location. Why
would it? There is nothing wrong with weapons, only people that may abuse them.

Even today we still have Switzerland and Czechia as some of the most heavily
armed nations on the planet, which do not have any more serious problems with
firearms-related criminality than Germany or Norway. Yet, despite this, in a
lamentable way, [Norwegians allow their culture to be infected with
hysteria](https://www.adressa.no/nyheter/trondelag/i/9EwmWE/soldater-med-vapen-inne-pa-kjopesenter-i-levanger)
from media and political talking points originating in the USA. My hunting
instructor told me how people regularly summon the police when they hear
gunfire in the nearby forest, only for the SWAT team to find -- to nobody's
surprise -- [a hunter who was performing normal hunting-related activities in
the
forest](https://www.ba.no/nyheter/jeger-ble-overrasket-av-vapnet-politi/s/1-41-7553635).

The point here isn't legislation or morality surrounding guns. My point here is
to highlight the symptom of a deeper cultural sickness. It's not something
exclusive to Norway, of course. Poland to some extent also suffers from this,
but I will get to that.

The image of a SWAT team descending on a lone Norwegian hunter is the perfect
metaphor for a society that has become afraid of its own shadow. The
farmer-sharpshooter who once guaranteed the nation's sovereignty has been
replaced by a citizen who is terrified by the very tools that secured his
freedom. This citizen no longer trusts his traditional roots, or even himself.
Norwegians have forgotten many aspects of their great culture. As cold as it is
to say, a large chunk of Norwegian society has transformed from intrepid
opportunity-seizing vikings, to largely risk-averse people of the modern world
who freak out over hearing a bang in the forest.

{{< figure src="/why_i_moved_on/tesla.jpg" caption="The modern Norwegian tradition of rolling up to your 2,000,000 kr *hytte*, in a brand new Tesla on a neat access road, with tap water and electricity does not have the same ring to it." >}}

In Poland, a different instinct prevails. A history of being betrayed,
occupied, and erased from the map has taught Poles a healthy skepticism towards
entrusting their safety entirely to outside forces, including their own state.
Self-reliance is not a hobby; it’s a deeply ingrained historical necessity. The
idea of calling an armed response team because you heard a hunter in the woods
would be met with ridicule, because the forest and the hunter are still
understood as normal parts of the landscape of life. Granted that Poles still
have a somewhat irrational aversion to firearms, but I digress.

This allergy to risk, this outsourcing of responsibility, doesn't stop with
guns. It seeps into everything. It's in the way children of Norway are raised
in sanitised, bubble-wrapped environments, the way social discourse demands
absolute conformity to avoid offence or radical changes, and the way the state
is expected to provide a safety net for every poor decision. It is the slow,
comfortable march towards a society of dependents, and it was a future I could
not see myself in. I still held out hope that this would change, but it didn't.
If anything, it has become far worse after I resettled.

Is Poland a super Catholic and traditional society amidst a hyper-liberal
Europe? Some people would like you to believe that, but this is not true at
all. Modernity has also come to Poland. With a dramatic increase in affluence
-- [possibly exceeding that of Norway as of
2025](https://www.nettavisen.no/nyheter/har-gjort-oss-fattigere-enn-polakker/s/5-95-2535757)
-- Poles have also become drunk on modern convenience and ideals. Where before
God and the Vatican was the binding glue of society, these days around Poles
are largely religious only on Sunday Mass. Even then, it is up for debate how
many attendees actually pay attention to the worship. Just the same as in other
European countries, clothes that would have been unthinkable on an adult woman
20 years ago are now the norm for 13-year-old girls today.

**So why do I care? What has tangibly changed in my situation, if Poland is
slowly heading towards the same degree of liberalisation and ways of thinking
as Norway?** The answer is about trajectory and foundation. It’s one thing to
be on a moving train. It’s another thing entirely to know where the train
started and how fast it’s going.

Norway’s train left the station of deep-rooted tradition long before I was
born. It has been moving at full speed for 50 years, fuelled by oil wealth and
insulated from the shocks that force a society to remember what matters. The
journey has been so smooth for so long that the destination -- a society of
comfortable, risk-averse dependents -- is not just in sight, it's the next
stop. The cultural battle is, for the most part, over. The consensus has been
set. I hope I am wrong in this.

Poland’s train just left the station. For half a century, it was stuck behind
the Iron Curtain, a forced immobility that, funnily enough, preserved much of
its cultural foundation. The historical memory of hardship is still fresh. The
family unit is still the undisputed centre of life. Religion, even if practised
with less fervour, still provides a moral bedrock that is simply absent in
Scandinavia.

{{< figure src="/why_i_moved_on/pamiec.webp" caption="Memory of those from my home town, who have given their lives for the liberation of Poland. Photo by [Zambrow.org](https://zambrow.org/artykul/upamietnili-poleglych-n1616309)" >}}

So yes, Poland is liberalising. Yes, it is wrestling with the same demons of
modernity. But the crucial difference is that here, it is still a *wrestle*.
The battle is still raging. In Poland, tradition is not a museum piece; it's an
active, powerful force in the public square. The hundreds of thousands men who
perished in battle are real; they move people, even if jaded by modernity. You
have a choice. You can choose to live in a community that still holds to older
values. You can build a life, raise a family, and find allies who believe in
the same things you do. You are a participant in a living debate.

In Norway, that debate feels finished. The ship has sailed, and anyone who
questions its direction is treated as if they want to sink it; as if they are
extremists or radicals. In Poland, there are still people arguing about the
map. I would rather be in a society that is still arguing about its soul than
in one that has already parted with it for comfort and safety. That, tangibly,
is what has changed for me. I have exchanged comfortable consensus for a
meaningful conflict.

There's a million and one more things that I could have written about here,
such as:

- [The continual demonisation of investors and entrepreneurs by the ruling
politicians](https://www.finansavisen.no/politikk/2025/07/11/8278162/norske-eiere-rommer-fire-ar-med-brannsalg),
for reasons that still remain entirely unknown.
- [How the government doubled down on highest taxation in the world despite
having a budget surplus equal to 14% of its
GDP in
2024](https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2025/06/government-at-a-glance-2025_70e14c6c/full-report.html).
Again, for reasons unknown.
- How the railway network has shrunk since 1945.

However, this would be just rehashing the same tired point about economics and
standards of living. Both of those topics are, in the grand scheme of things,
fleeting and boring. This is why I choose to focus more on the intangible,
incalculable things that people care about more: culture and tradition.

My intention is not to be polemic; to spit on Norway and its culture. Quite on
the contrary, I am writing what I am writing because I am frustrated with how
short Norwegians sell themselves. They can be so much more. If Norway at one
point had the second-largest merchant marine in the world, why can't they do it
again? The spark is just not there anymore, yet it feels like I am the only one
who takes this seriously. It's not like I am trying to do backseat
quarterbacking either: while I might not be in Norway anymore, I am most
definitely going to work according to the Norwegian work ethic. I will advocate
for labour unions if given the opportunity. If I see a business opportunity, I
will seize it, as my host nation ancestors have done. For treating my cancer in
2019 through its public medical system, I have nothing but gratefulness for my
host nation, so it is the least that I can do in return.

That gratitude is not platitude. It is a debt I intend to repay. This, then, is
the multicultural exchange I spoke of at the beginning. It is not about
abandoning one home for another, but about carrying the best of one's heritage
into the arms of another. I left Norway not because I hate it, but because I
love what it once was, and what it could be again, too much to stand by and
watch that spirit fade. Ultimately, my move to Poland was not an act of
rejection, but an act of preservation -- an attempt to keep that intrepid
Norwegian spark alive, even if I had to carry the torch to another shore.

{{< youtube O7q5bNX6EWQ >}}
